So much modern biblical interpretation has been about finding the original meaning in the text, but such a quest is at best elusive and at worst an illusion. An anarchic interface provides the opportunity to think of bible and its reading practices entirely differently. Perhaps we are not thinking about these practices entirely differently. Instead, maybe just suggesting use practices that fit with an emerging media landscape. Thinking of bible as an interface rather than simply as a container for content allows us to explore the way emerging technologies can translate and transform enduring traditions of bible reading into the coming media age in ways that transcend the usual media binaries of writer/reader, producer/consumer, form/content, right/wrong.

Why bother? Internet is changing how we imagine books and our relationship with them. Bible is infinitely tied to the technologies of book, so as technologies transform our notion of book, they will indefinitely change our relationship with bible. One way to talk about how technologies change our relationship with books, thus bible, is through changes in our relationship to nearness and distance. 

Bible has always been bound to book. The history of bible is so deeply intertwined with the 

I propose that digital media create the possibility to engage bible as an anarchic interface. I call it an *interface* in order to stress that bible readers are more than just passive consumers of the words they read; they are also makers of meaning. I describe this interface as *anarchic* because the word’s etymology means both without a beginning and without a reign. Thus, an anarchic interface is a space of contact where meaning is produced without the reign of an original. 

I propose that emerging technologies encourage us to consider bible as an interface that affords proximity through demonstrating the characteristics of high surface area, collaborative capacities, and anarchic tendencies.

@@I need to find some sources that articulate a theory of reading as consumption of content. I can couple this with the canon conversation as an example of pervasive sense of bible as container of content.

Looking for an alternative to the container model of interface, where the structure of a space dictates the consumptive actions of a user, Johanna Drucker provides a notion of interface as a zone of encounter. With books, this zone or space is where reader encounters text and something is made in the entanglement of contingencies and possibilities of that particular moment of encounter. Affordances are a common concept in interface design that will help us explore the ways in which physical characteristics of an interface shape and are shaped by the possible actions of a particular user to construct the possible set of relationships between a user and an interface. As we consider the design of book interfaces that provide this space of encounter where something is made in the practice of reading, I will advocate for attention to an affordance of anarchy that dethrones the governing role of a singular original without eradicating useful historical relations. Bible reading communities throughout history have provided some models for this anarchic interface and can provide important guidance and wisdom as we explore emerging media capacities for our relationship with books.^[Add a section here, perhaps, defining a few of the basic terms I use that I will not spend a lot of time defining or will not define more fully later. Terms such as technology, digital, media/um, bible, book, etc.]

This question of bible as interface emerged for me through an exploration of the material media transition from roll to codex as the dominant book technology in the early centuries of the common era. We have evidence of one man's experience of this media transition early in antiquity. The first century Roman poet, Marshall, reflects on encountering his own writings in this new technological form. Marshall says, "" (). The codex form of book has been so deeply naturalized as the preeminent form of learning and knowledge for me, that this historical reminder that codex was once a novel and even questionable book technology helps contextualize the current media revolution we are experiencing with the rise of online reading practices. I have spent my formative academic years in a major media transition from the dominance of print to the proliferation of electronic book interfaces such as Print Document Format (PDF), books on the internet, and the Kindle reader on my iPhone. This present upheaval in technological mediation of book has made me more attuned to the cultural dynamics that may have been at work in the early centuries of the common era as the codex became more prevalent in literature, law, and religious writings. 

My exploration here of bible as a proximate interface and the technological ramifications of bible as book will not endeavor to unpack all of the potential intersections between the emergence of the codex as a predominant medium for christian scriptures and the difficult process of Judeo-Christian differentiation, or lack thereof, during the first four centuries of the common era.^[See Daniel Boyarin's *Borderlines* for an analysis of the demarcation between Jews and Christians in early antiquity. See many others for the relationship between codex and rise of xianity...] Yet, it will become clear in the conversation partners I have chosen in this project that this question of the difference between Jews and Christians and their relationships with their books is never far from my mind.

Located at the intersection of several discourses, mainly, discussions of the material history of bible as book (grafton, Roberts, skeat, gamble, beal, siker) and the entanglement of emerging technologies and human communication (Plato, Heidegger, Benjamin, turkle, Carr)

In no way do I propose these two terms as opposites and with Drucker I am asking in this project for a greater attention to the materiality of the digital. 

** NEED to push from affordance to dispositions because i think that will help in the interface history below, talking about the dispositions afforded by roll, codex and kindle -- maybe focus on a few such as closedness and atomization or something?

With bible as anarchic interface established, I will use N. Katherine Hayle’s “media specific analysis” to look back at the performance of anarchic interface on the Talmudic page and in illuminated medieval manuscripts. Then we will analyze a few contemporary bible interfaces in digital media -- Twible, biblegateway.com, and YouVersion’s Bible app -- to evaluate the degree to which they afford anarchy in the practice of reading. In conclusion, I will beckon us forward by offering the blueprints for an experimental bible app that highlight the challenges and possibilities of anarchic interface design and will offer some encouragement in light of the pervasive anxiety about human relationship and reading practices in today's media environment. 